oh my galaxy without
gravitational waves
yeah
hey stargazers Julia here for
dnews a long time ago in a
galaxy far far away two black
holes collided in a fateful
swirly waltz
just like when you toss a rock
into a pond and the kerplunk
creates ripples on the surface
of the water
this collision sent ripples
through the fabric of space-time
and we finally detected one of
these ripples or as researchers
call them gravitational waves
we've been looking for these
kinds of waves for a long time
albert einstein first proposed
their existence in his theory of
relativity over a hundred years
ago so we've been searching for
them ever since
and just how the ripples in the
pond gets smaller as they move
further from their car plug .
the ripples in space-time gets
smaller - that's why they're so
hard to detect until now
today ligo or the laser
interferometer
gravitational-wave Observatory
announced that they found the
Galactic kerplunk by detecting
or hearing one of the ripples
Shh listen
music to my ears
the signal was seen on September
14th last year but the
cataclysmic event that caused it
happen nearly 1.3 billion years
ago when two black holes
collided
well two black holes colliding
has been theorized it hasn't
been observed before the theory
goes that two black holes will
circle each other and lose
energy that's released as
gravitational waves over time
they will get closer and closer
over the course of a few billion
years then finally collide in a
fraction of a second
this release is a large amount
of masses energy in the form of
gravitational waves in this case
the black holes were about 30
times the mass of our Sun and
we're moving at half the speed
of light in that last fraction
of a second
this huge impact sent a shock
wave of gravitational waves or
ripples in space-time through
the universe at the speed of
light
but as massive as that collision
was the reverberations that
reached us for tiny like 11
thousand the diameter of a
proton
according to David Wright see
the executive director of ligo
like Oh was able to detect such
a tiny wiggle by using two labs
one in Livingston Louisiana and
one in hand for
Washington the labs use massive
and precise lasers like 2.5 mile
long laser beams that can read
ten thousand times smaller than
a proton these lasers were fired
into two l-shaped pipes that
sounds light around a series of
mirrors a strain and space-time
would change the timing of when
the lasers reach their
destination
and that's just what happened on
that fateful day the same wiggle
showed up on the detectors in
the two labs just seven
milliseconds apart and more
incredible these Wiggles matched
up to what super computer models
of gravitational waves had
already predicted which were
based off of the calculations
from Einstein's theory of
relativity
so it's the real deal we now
have solid evidence of
gravitational waves and evidence
and binary black holes and this
discovery proves Einstein's
theory
finally we've been searching for
these guys for a century
rumors have it that this
discovery could make the
shortlist for a Nobel Prize
why well researchers are hailing
that the discovery could be as
exciting as when we discovered
x-rays like oh co founder says
that has open a new window onto
the universe studying and
tracking gravitational waves
will help us better understand
black holes supernovas other
really large space events and
even possibly the fundamental
laws of the universe will learn
so much more about the universe
and how it works as i go upgrade
their equipment to become more
and more sensitive and in a few
decades the european space
agency plans to launch a
space-based gravitational wave
detector so hopefully more
gravitational waves will be
detected
if you want to learn more about
this amazing discovery check out
the study published in the
journal Physical Review Letters
Wow Wow guys so much incredible
science happening right now in
our lifetime
instead would be so proud of
gravitational wave seem like a
familiar concept it's because we
talked about them before on
dnews a telescope called bicep2
is looking for evidence of
gravitational waves of a
different kind from the most
cataclysmic event of all time
the big bang to learn more about
that check out these episodes
right here
these waves were predicted by
Einstein and in a nutshell his
equation predicted that should a
massive object like a black hole
or neutron star suddenly
accelerate decelerate or collide
and it should be lost but in
these cosmic scenarios energy is
lost through powerful ripples in
space-time much like the ripples
that race across
surface of home after pebbles
hits the water so how excited
are you guys about this new
discovery
tell us down in the comments
below don't forget to hit those
like and subscribe buttons and
keep coming back to dnews we've
got new episodes every day of
the week